PEP 776: Emscripten support (#4307)
python/peps: peps/pep-0776.rst

PEP: 776
Title: Emscripten Support
Author: Hood Chatham <roberthoodchatham at gmail.com>

> Sponsor: Łukasz Langa <lukasz at python.org>, Russell Keith-Magee <russell at keith-magee.com>

Reviewer: ```
peps/pep-0776.rst:4:  Sponsor entries must not contain multiple '<': 'Łukasz Langa <lukasz at python.org>,\n         Russell Keith-Magee <russell at keith-magee.com>'
```

Hmm, I think the linter is only expecting a single sponsor.

https://peps.python.org/pep-0001/#submitting-a-pep talks of a singular sponsor.

PEP: 776
Title: Emscripten Support
Author: Hood Chatham <roberthoodchatham at gmail.com>
Sponsor: Łukasz Langa <lukasz at python.org>
Discussions-To: https://discuss.python.org/t/pep-776-emscripten-support/84996
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Topic: Packaging
Created: 18-Mar-2025
Python-Version: 3.14

> Post-History: `18-Mar-2025 <https://discuss.python.org/t/pep-776-emscripten-support/84996`__

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Post-History: `18-Mar-2025 <https://discuss.python.org/t/pep-776-emscripten-support/84996>`__
```

Reviewer: PS For your next PEP, we usually prefer to have a first editing pass here and get it merged to https://peps.python.org/ before opening the discussion, so people have a single canonical version to review.

-- it is not possible to stack switch through JavaScript frames.

Using the wasm-gc `ref.test
<https://webassembly.github.io/gc/core/exec/instructions.html#xref-syntax-instructions-syntax-instr-ref-mathsf-ref-test-mathit-rt>`__
instruction, we can query the type of the function pointer and manually fix up
the argument list.

wasm-gc is a relatively new feature for WebAssembly runtimes, so we attempt to
use a wasm-gc based function pointer cast trampoline if possible and fall back
to a JS trampoline if not. Every JavaScript runtime that supports stack
switching also supports wasm-gc, so this ensures that stack switching works on
every platform runtime that supports it. The one wrinkle is that iOS 18 ships a
broken implementation of wasm-gc so we have to special case it.

`See here for the full implementation details.
<https://github.com/python/cpython/blob/98fa4a49fecbac3c990a25ce5d300592dad31be0/Python/emscripten_trampoline.c>`__

The function pointer cast handling is fully implemented in cpython. Pyodide uses
exactly the same code as upstream.

------------
CI Resources
------------

Pyodide can be built and tested on any Linux with a reasonably recent version of

> Node. Anaconda has offered to provide physical hardware to run Android

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Node.js. Anaconda has offered to provide physical hardware to run Android
```

Reviewer 2: Should that be “Emscripten buildbots”?

buildbots, maintained by Russell Keith-Magee.

CPython does not currently test Tier 3 platforms on GitHub Actions, but if this
ever changes, their Linux runners are able to build and test Emscripten Python.

---------
Packaging
---------

Existing Package Support
========================

Pyodide currently maintains ports of 255 different packages at the time of this
writing, including major scientific Python packages like numpy, scipy, pandas,
polars, scikit-learn, opencv, pyarrow, and Pillow as well as general purpose
packages like aiohttp, requests, pydantic, cryptography, and orjson.

> About 60 packages are also testing against Pyodide in their CI, including numpy,
> pandas, awkward-cpp, scikit-image, statsmodels, pyarrow, hypothesis, and PyO3.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
About 60 packages are also testing against Pyodide in their CI, including NumPy,
pandas, awkward-cpp, scikit-image, statsmodels, PyArrow, Hypothesis, and PyO3.
```

The first triple is ambiguous, since even with Emscripten 3.1.58 it is possible
to link dynamic libraries that require a large number of distinct ABIs,
depending on linker and compiler options. It is our intent that the
``pyodide_2025_0`` specifies the particular ABI. Thus, the relationship between
``pyodide_<abi>`` and ``emscripten_<version>`` is intended to be the same as the
relationship between ``manylinux<version>`` and ``linux``.

The specification of the ``pyodide_<abi>`` ABI includes:

* Which version of the Emscripten compiler is used
* What libraries are statically linked with the interpreter
* What stack unwinding ABI is to be used
* Which runtime platform features are required to be present

and a handful of other similar details that affect the ABI.

The ABI is selected by choosing the appropriate version of the Emscripten
compiler and passing appropriate compiler and linker flags. It is possible for
other people to build their own Python interpreter that is compatible with the
Pyodide ABI, it is not necessary to use the Pyodide distribution itself.

The ``pyodide build`` tool knows how to create wheels that match our ABI. As an
alternative,

> `the auditwheel-emscripten tool <https://github.com/ryanking13/auditwheel-emscripten>`__
> 
> is capable of performing basic compatibility checks, vendoring shared libraries,

Reviewer: Delete newline to remove new paragraph

```suggestion
`the auditwheel-emscripten tool <https://github.com/ryanking13/auditwheel-emscripten>`__
is capable of performing basic compatibility checks, vendoring shared libraries,
```

and retagging the wheel from ``emscripten_<version>`` to ``pyodide_<abi>``. Unlike

> with manylinux, there is no need for a docker container to build the
> ``pyodide_<abi>`` wheels. All that is needed is a Linux machine and appropriate
> versions of Python, node, and Emscripten.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with manylinux, there is no need for a Docker container to build the
``pyodide_<abi>`` wheels. All that is needed is a Linux machine and appropriate
versions of Python, Node.js, and Emscripten.
```

------
PEP 11
------

> PEP 11 will be updated to indicate that Emscripten is supported. Specifically

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:pep:`11` will be updated to indicate that Emscripten is supported. Specifically
```

the triples ``wasm32-unknown-emscripten_xx_xx_xx``.

Russell Keith-Magee will serve as the initial core team contact for these ABIs.

===========
Future Work
===========

-------------------------------------------------
Improving Cross Builds in the Packaging Ecosystem
-------------------------------------------------

> Python now supports four non-self-hosting platforms: iOS, Android, wasi, and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Python now supports four non-self-hosting platforms: iOS, Android, WASI, and
```

Emscripten. All of them will need to build packages via cross builds. Currently,
``pyodide-build`` allows building a very large number of Python packages for
Emscripten, but it relies on a giant pile of hacks. In the long run, we would
like to make the packaging ecosystem support cross builds in a sane way.

-----------------------------------------
Pyodide Runtime Features to be Upstreamed
-----------------------------------------

This is a collection of Pyodide runtime features that are out of scope for this
PEP and for the Python 3.14 development cycle but we would like to upstream in
the future.

JavaScript API for Bootstrapping
================================

Currently we offer no stable API for bootstrapping Python. Instead, we use one

> collection of settings for the Node cli entrypoint and a separate collection of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
collection of settings for the Node.js CLI entrypoint and a separate collection of
```

settings for the browser demo.
https://github.com/python/cpython/tree/98fa4a49fecbac3c990a25ce5d300592dad31be0/Tools/wasm/emscripten/node_entry.mjs
https://github.com/python/cpython/blob/98fa4a49fecbac3c990a25ce5d300592dad31be0/Tools/wasm/emscripten/web_example/python.worker.mjs

The Emscripten executable startup API is complicated and there are many possible
configurations that are broken. Pyodide offers a simpler set of options than
Emscripten. This gives downstream users a lot of flexibility while allowing us
to maintain a small number of tested configurations. It also reduces downstream
code duplication.

Eventually, we would like to upstream Pyodide's bootstrapping API. In the short
term, to keep things simple we will support no JavaScript API.

FFI
===

Because Emscripten supports POSIX, a significant number of tasks can be achieved
using the ``os`` module. However, many fundamental operations in JavaScript
runtimes are not possible via POSIX APIs. Pyodide's approach is to specify a
mapping between the JavaScript object model and the Python object model and a
calling convention that allows high level bidirectional integration.

> Asyncio
> ========

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Asyncio
=======
```

PEP: 776
Title: Emscripten Support
Author: Hood Chatham <roberthoodchatham at gmail.com>
Sponsor: Łukasz Langa <lukasz at python.org>

> Discussions-To: https://discuss.python.org/t/pep-776-emscripten-support/84996

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Discussions-To: https://discuss.python.org/t/84996
```

Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Topic: Packaging
Created: 18-Mar-2025
Python-Version: 3.14

> Post-History: `18-Mar-2025 <https://discuss.python.org/t/pep-776-emscripten-support/84996>`__

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Post-History: `18-Mar-2025 <https://discuss.python.org/t/84996>`__
```

toolchain which compiles C/C++ code into WebAssembly/JavaScript executables that
run in JavaScript runtimes including browsers and Node.js.

This PEP formalizes the addition of Tier 3 for Emscripten support in Python 3.14
which `was approved by the steering council on October 25, 2024
<https://github.com/python/steering-council/issues/256>`__. The goal is to allow
Pyodide wheels to be uploaded to PyPI.

==========
Motivation
==========

A web browser is a universal computing platform, available on Windows, macOS,
Linux, and every smartphone.

`The Pyodide project <https://pyodide.org/>`__ has for years supported
Emscripten Python. Hundreds of thousands of students have learned Python through
Pyodide via projects like `Capytale
<https://web.archive.org/web/20241211090946/https://cfp.jupytercon.com/2023/talk/TJ9YEV/>`__
and `PyodideU <https://stanford.edu/~cpiech/bio/papers/pyodideU.pdf>`__. Pyodide
is also increasingly being used by Python packages to provide interactive
documentation. This demonstrates both the importance and the maturity of the
Emscripten platform.

Emscripten and WASI are also the only supported platforms that offer any
meaningful sandboxing.

=====
Goals

> =====

Reviewer 3: In general we try and stick to the suggested sections in [PEP 12](https://peps.python.org/pep-0012/#suggested-sections), perhaps this could be 'Rationale' (or even part of the specification).

Also, please could you change to only underlined headings? You can use tildes or carets if you need more nesting than simply sections and subsections.

Author: > Also, please could you change to only underlined heading?

I have four nested levels of headings. The overlined headings are suggested here:
https://peps.python.org/pep-0012/#section-headings

I am happy to switch to whatever convention is preferred but perhaps pep 12 should be updated if people don't like the overlined headings. I agree that they are a bit confusing.

Author: Okay I moved back to the headings I originally used instead of the PEP 12 headings.

Author: > In general we try and stick to the suggested sections in [PEP 12](https://peps.python.org/pep-0012/#suggested-sections)

I think "Goals" makes more sense as a top level section than a subsection or "Rationale". The "Suggested Settings" section of PEP 12 makes no statement to the effect that other section names is not allowed. So I think I'll keep it this way unless someone else seconds the suggestion.

Because of these limitations, Pyodide standardizes a no-pthreads build of
Python. We will start with support for no-pthreads builds. If there is
sufficient demand, a pthreads build with no dynamic loader could be added later.

----------------------------
Emscripten ABI Compatibility
----------------------------

The Emscripten compiler has no ABI stability guarantees between versions. Many
Emscripten updates are ABI compatible by chance, and the Rust Emscripten target
behaves as if the ABI were stable with only `occasional negative consequences
<https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/131467>`__.

There are several linker flags that adjust the Emscripten ABI, so Python
packages built to run with Emscripten must make sure to match the ABI-sensitive
linker flags used to compile the interpreter to avoid load-time or run-time
errors. The Emscripten compiler continuously fixes bugs and adds support for new
web platform features. Thus, there is significant benefit to being able to
update the ABI.

In order to balance the ABI stability needs of package maintainers with the ABI
flexibility to allow the platform to move forward, we plan to adopt a new ABI

> for each minor (3.xx) release of Python.

Reviewer: We call them feature releases elsewhere: https://devguide.python.org/developer-workflow/development-cycle/

```suggestion
for each feature release of Python.
```

Author: thanks!

functions in the interpreter for various purposes. It is possible to dynamically
link object files that include ``EM_JS`` functions, but their behavior deviates
significantly from their behavior in static builds. For this reason, it would
require special work to support. If a use case for dynamically linking the
interpreter in Emscripten emerges, we can evaluate how much effort would be
required to support it.

----------------
Standard Library
----------------

Unsupported Modules
===================

See https://pyodide.org/en/stable/usage/wasm-constraints.html#removed-modules.

Removed Modules
---------------

The following modules are removed from the standard library to reduce download
size and since they currently wouldn't work in the WebAssembly VM.

- curses
- dbm
- ensurepip
- fcntl
- grp
- idlelib
- msvcrt
- pwd
- resource
- syslog
- termios
- tkinter
- turtle
- turtledemo
- venv
- winreg
- winsound

Included but not Working Modules
--------------------------------

The following modules can be imported, but are not functional:

- multiprocessing
- threading
- sockets

as well as any functionality that requires these.

> The following are present but cannot be imported due to a dependency on the

Author: Uh... that is a good question. This language was added to the Pyodide docs in this PR:
https://github.com/pyodide/pyodide/pull/4078/

I just confirmed is true of both Pyodide and Emscripten Cpython. I think the removals are mainly targeted at large modules whereas pty and tty are only a few kilobytes so nobody ever bothered to remove them. If we think they _should_ be removed, I can add language to that effect.

> The following are present but cannot be imported due to a dependency on the

Reviewer 4: Yeah I don't feel strongly, this just stood out as an oddity while reading

PEP: 776
Title: Emscripten Support
Author: Hood Chatham <roberthoodchatham at gmail.com>
Sponsor: Łukasz Langa <lukasz at python.org>
Discussions-To: https://discuss.python.org/t/84996
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Topic: Packaging
Created: 18-Mar-2025
Python-Version: 3.14
Post-History: `18-Mar-2025 <https://discuss.python.org/t/84996>`__

Abstract
========

`Emscripten <https://emscripten.org/>`__ is a complete open source compiler
toolchain which compiles C/C++ code into WebAssembly/JavaScript executables that
run in JavaScript runtimes including browsers and Node.js.

This PEP formalizes the addition of Tier 3 for Emscripten support in Python 3.14
which `was approved by the steering council on October 25, 2024
<https://github.com/python/steering-council/issues/256>`__. The goal is to allow
Pyodide wheels to be uploaded to PyPI.

Motivation
==========

A web browser is a universal computing platform, available on Windows, macOS,
Linux, and every smartphone.

> `The Pyodide project <https://pyodide.org/>`__ has for years supported

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`The Pyodide project <https://pyodide.org/>`__ has for several years supported
```

Author: Maybe we can be more specific: `has supported Emscripten Python since 2018`.

> Emscripten Python. Hundreds of thousands of students have learned Python through

Reviewer 3: I've read a couple of times and I'm unclear on the distinction between "Emscripten Python" and "Pyodide". Is there a reference for a disambiguation? The only mention of Python on the [emscripten intro page](https://emscripten.org/docs/introducing_emscripten/about_emscripten.html) references Pyodide.

Pyodide via projects like `Capytale
<https://web.archive.org/web/20241211090946/https://cfp.jupytercon.com/2023/talk/TJ9YEV/>`__
and `PyodideU <https://stanford.edu/~cpiech/bio/papers/pyodideU.pdf>`__. Pyodide
is also increasingly being used by Python packages to provide interactive
documentation. This demonstrates both the importance and the maturity of the
Emscripten platform.

Emscripten and WASI are also the only supported platforms that offer any

> meaningful sandboxing.

Reviewer 3: Is this worth noting in _Security Implications_?

Goals
=====

> It is our long term goal to upstream the entire Pyodide runtime into CPython,

Reviewer 3: Is 'our' here the authorial we, or does it refer to a broader group of people?

Author: The authorial `we`.

but this is out of scope for the present PEP. This PEP only attempts to
establish the foundation for future work.

Runtime Goals
-------------

1. To describe the current state of the CPython Emscripten runtime
2. To describe the current state of the Pyodide runtime
3. To identify minor features to be upstreamed from the Pyodide runtime into the
   CPython Emscripten runtime

The minor features identified here are all features that could be implemented
without a PEP. We discuss more significant runtime features that we would like
to implement but we defer decisions on those features to subsequent PEPs.

Packaging Goals
---------------

1. To describe Pyodide's packaging tooling
2. To describe Pyodide's wheel abi to a similar level of detail as the manylinux
   PEPs

> 3. To request that Pyodide wheels be allowed for upload to PyPI

Reviewer 3: A PEP specifies, rather than requesting -- if this PEP is accepted and implemented, Pyodide wheels will be permitted:

```suggestion
3. For Pyodide wheels to be allowed for upload to PyPI
```

1. To describe Pyodide's packaging tooling

> 2. To describe Pyodide's wheel abi to a similar level of detail as the manylinux
>    peps
> 3. To request that Pyodide wheels be allowed for upload to pypi

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. To describe Pyodide's wheel abi to a similar level of detail as the manylinux
   PEPs
3. To request that Pyodide wheels be allowed for upload to PyPI
```

Background on Emscripten
------------------------

`Emscripten
<https://emscripten.org/docs/introducing_emscripten/about_emscripten.html>`__
consists of a C and C++ compiler and linker based on LLVM, together with a
runtime based on a mildly patched musl libc.

> Emscripten is a POSIX-based platform. It uses the WebAssembly binary format,
> specified here:
> 
> * https://webassembly.github.io/spec/core/binary/index.html
> * https://github.com/WebAssembly/tool-conventions/blob/main/DynamicLinking.md

Reviewer 3: Is this an accurate rephrasing?
```suggestion
Emscripten is a POSIX-based platform. It uses the `WebAssembly binary format`_,
including the `dynamic linking extension`_.

.. _WebAssembly binary format: https://webassembly.github.io/spec/core/binary/index.html
.. _dynamic linking extension: https://github.com/WebAssembly/tool-conventions/blob/main/DynamicLinking.md
```

Author: Yes, thanks. I will replace the word "extension" with the more specific word "section".

modest number of modifications to the normal Linux target.

POSIX Compliance
----------------

Emscripten is a POSIX platform. However, there are POSIX APIs that exist but
always fail when called and POSIX APIs that don't exist at all. In particular,
there are problems with networking APIs and blocking I/O, and there is no
support for ``fork()``. See `Emscripten Portability Guidelines
<https://emscripten.org/docs/porting/guidelines/portability_guidelines.html>`__.

Emscripten executables can be linked with threading support, but it comes
with several limitations:

* Enabling threading requires websites to be served with special security headers
  that indicate acceptance of the possibility of `Spectre <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spectre_(security_vulnerability)>`__-style information
  leakage. These headers are a usability hazard for users who are not intimately
  familiar with the web platform.

* If an executable is linked with both threading and a dynamic loader, Emscripten
  prints a warning that using dynamic loading and pthreads together is
  experimental. It may cause performance problems or crashes. These problems may
  require WebAssembly standards work to resolve.

> Because of these limitations, Pyodide standardizes a no-pthreads build of
> Python. We will start with support for no-pthreads builds. If there is
> sufficient demand, a pthreads build with no dynamic loader could be added later.

Reviewer 3: The second sentence seems to repeat the first
```suggestion
Because of these limitations, Pyodide standardizes a no-pthreads build of
Python. If there is sufficient demand, a pthreads build with no dynamic loader
could be added later.
```

sufficient demand, a pthreads build with no dynamic loader could be added later.

----------------------------
Emscripten ABI Compatibility
----------------------------

The Emscripten compiler has no ABI stability guarantees between versions. Many
Emscripten updates are ABI compatible by chance, and the Rust Emscripten target
behaves as if the ABI were stable with only `occasional negative consequences
<https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/131467>`__.

There are several linker flags that adjust the Emscripten ABI, so Python
packages built to run with Emscripten must make sure to match the ABI-sensitive
linker flags used to compile the interpreter to avoid load-time or run-time
errors. The Emscripten compiler continuously fixes bugs and adds support for new
web platform features. Thus, there is significant benefit to being able to
update the ABI.

In order to balance the ABI stability needs of package maintainers with the ABI
flexibility to allow the platform to move forward, we plan to adopt a new ABI
for each minor release of Python.

It is also necessary to coordinate the ABI flags that we use with the Emscripten

> ABI that Rust supports if we want support for the many popular Rust packages.

Author: Okay I think I addressed this in a8e6d5e.

* The Emscripten Software Developer Kit (emsdk) which can be used to install the
  Emscripten compiler toolchain (emcc).
* emcc is a C and C++ compiler, linker, and a sysroot with headers for the
  system libraries. The system libraries themselves are generated on the fly

>   based on the ABI requested.

Author: Perhaps we should also add links to these.

* ``pyodide venv`` can make a virtual environment that runs in Pyodide.
* ``pytest-pyodide`` can test Python code against various JavaScript runtimes.

cibuildwheel supports building wheels to target Emscripten using ``pyodide build``.

In the short term, Pyodide's packaging tooling will stay in the Pyodide
repository. It is an open question where Pyodide's packaging tooling should live
in the long term. Two sensible options would be for it to remain under the
``pyodide`` organization or be moved into the ``pypa`` organization on GitHub.

Emscripten Application Lifecycle
--------------------------------

An Emscripten "binary" consists of a pair of files, an ``.mjs`` file and a
``.wasm`` file. The ``.wasm`` file contains all of the compiled C/C++/Rust code.
The ``.mjs`` file contains the lifecycle code to set up the runtime, locate the
``.wasm`` file, compile it, instantiate it, call the ``main()`` function, and to
shut down the runtime on exit. It also includes an implementation for all of the
system calls, including the file system, the dynamic loader, and any logic to
expose additional functionality from the JavaScript runtime to C code.

> The ``.mjs`` file exports a single ``bootstrapEmscriptenExecutable()``

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The ``.mjs`` file exports a single :js:func:`bootstrapEmscriptenExecutable()`
```

JavaScript function that bootstraps the runtime, calls the ``main()`` function,
and returns an API object that can be used to call C functions. Each time it is
called produces a complete and independent copy of the runtime with its own
separate address space.

> The ``bootstrapEmscriptenExecutable()`` takes a large number of runtime

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The :js:func:`bootstrapEmscriptenExecutable()` takes a large number of runtime
```

settings. `The full list is described in the Emscripten documentation here.
<https://emscripten.org/docs/api_reference/module.html#id3>`__ The most
important of these are as follows:

> * ``thisProgram``: The value of ``argv[0]``. In Python, this makes its way into
>   ``sys.executable``.

Reviewer 3: Perhaps?:
```suggestion
* ``thisProgram``: The value of ``argv[0]``. In Pyodide, this makes its way into
  ``sys.executable``.
```

or 

```suggestion
* ``thisProgram``: The value of ``argv[0]``, which Pyodide exposes as ``sys.executable``
  in Python.
```

Author: I think reference to Pyodide is inappropriate here because this is a result purely of what Python does and what Emscripten does. Pyodide doesn't patch either or add any of its own code that changes this behavior. I guess what I should correctly say is that this is used by Emscripten as `argv[0]`, which is by default picked up by Python and used to set `sys.executable`.

<details><summary>Full example</summary>
<p>

a.c: 
```C
#include <stdio.h>
int main(int argc, char** argv) {
    printf("argv[0]: %s\n", argv[0]);
    return 0;
}
```

b.mjs:
```js
import setupEmscriptenModule from "./a.mjs";

setupEmscriptenModule({thisProgram: "abc"});
```

```
$ emcc a.c -o a.mjs
$ node b.mjs
argv[0]: abc
```

</p>
</details>

Author: See CPython code setting this here:
https://github.com/python/cpython/blob/main/Tools/wasm/emscripten/node_entry.mjs#L42-L45

* ``thisProgram``: The value of ``argv[0]``. In Python, this makes its way into
  ``sys.executable``.
* ``arguments``: The list of string arguments to be passed to ``main()``.
* ``preRun``: A list of callbacks which are invoked after the JavaScript runtime
  and file system have been bootstrapped but before calling ``main()``. Useful
  to set up the file system, environment variables, and standard streams.
* ``print`` / ``printErr`` : Initial handlers for stdout and stderr. They are
  line buffered and performing a ``flush()`` of a partial line forces an extra
  new line. If tty-like behavior is desired, the standard stream devices should
  be replaced in a ``preRun()`` hook.
* ``onExit``: A handler that is called when the runtime exits.
* ``instantiateWasm``: A callback that is called to instantiate the WebAssembly
  module. Overriding the WebAssembly instantiation procedure via this function
  is useful when you have other custom asynchronous startup actions or downloads
  that can be performed in parallel to WebAssembly compilation. Implementing
  this callback allows performing all of these in parallel.

-----------------
File System Setup
-----------------

> In order for Python to run, it needs access to the standard library in the

Reviewer 5: What bothers me a bit is that this only mentions the standard library. Wheels are still unpacked to the MEMFS or are they using ZipImporter now too?

I would have said maybe the file system is MEMFS in the browser and NODEFS in Node.js. Then in the browser we are importing the stdlib directly from a zip archive as a way of optimization.

Author: > Wheels are still unpacked to the MEMFS

Yeah wheels are still unpacked to the MEMFS or mounted via NodeFS. Maybe I'll add separate subsections for the standard library and for package loading.

Author: Added two subsections here about setting up the file system for the standard library and for the packages.

Emscripten file system. There are several possible approaches to this:

> * The Emscripten linker has a ``--preload-file`` flag that will automatically

Reviewer 5: It exists, but if we are not using it, maybe not worth mentioning it?

Reviewer 5: Unless it's intended to be an example of "Rejected Ideas". I don't know enough about best practices for writing PEPs..

Author: I'm going to leave these sections in for now. I can remove them if I get guidance that their inclusion is inappropriate.

> I don't know enough about best practices for writing PEPs..

Yeah me neither.

* For Node.js, use the NODEFS to mount a native directory with the files into the
  Emscripten file system. This is the most efficient option but is Node only. It

>   is closely analogous to what wasi does.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  is closely analogous to what WASI_ does.

  .. _WASI: https://wasi.dev/
```

* Put the standard library into a zip archive and use ``ZipImporter``. Using an
  uncompressed zip file allows the web server and client to apply better
  compression to the standard library itself. It also uses the more efficient
  native decompression algorithms of the browser rather than less efficient

>   WebAssembly decompression. The disadvantage of this is a higher memory
>   footprint and it breaks :py:mod:`inspect` and various tests that do not expect the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  WebAssembly decompression. The disadvantage of this are a higher memory
  footprint and breaking :py:mod:`inspect` & various tests that do not expect the
```

* Put the standard library into a zip archive and use ``ZipImporter``. Using an
  uncompressed zip file allows the web server and client to apply better
  compression to the standard library itself. It also uses the more efficient
  native decompression algorithms of the browser rather than less efficient
  WebAssembly decompression. The disadvantage of this is a higher memory
  footprint and it breaks ``inspect`` and various tests that do not expect the
  standard library to be packaged in this way.

> * Put the standard library into an uncompressed tar archive and mount it into a

Reviewer 5: If we are not doing it, I would remove this section to simplify

  TARFS read only file system backed by the tar file. This has the best memory
  usage, runtime performance, and transfer size of the options that can be used
  in the browser. The disadvantage is that Emscripten does not itself include a
  TARFS so it requires a downstream implementation.

> Pyodide uses the ``ZipImporter`` approach in every runtime.

Reviewer 5: For the stdlib but not the wheels (if I'm not mistaken)

> The ``ZipImporter`` provides a clean resolution for a bootstrapping problem: The

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The ``ZipImporter`` provides a clean resolution for a bootstrapping problem: the
```

available. Since ``zipimport.py`` is a frozen module, it avoids these problems.
All of the other approaches solve the bootstrapping problem by setting up the
standard library using JavaScript.

> Packages
> ~~~~~~~~

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Third-party packages
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```

It is also necessary to make any needed packages available in the Emscripten

> file system. Currently Emscripten cpython has no support for packages. Pyodide

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
file system. Currently Emscripten CPython has no support for packages. Pyodide
```

uses two different approaches for packages:

* In the browser, Pyodide downloads and unpacks wheels into the MEMFS
  site-packages directory. It then preloads all dynamic libraries in the wheel.
  The work of downloading and installing all the packages is redone every time
  the runtime starts.

> * The Pyodide ``python`` cli entrypoint mounts all of the host file system as

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* The Pyodide ``python`` CLI entrypoint mounts all of the host file system as
```

  NODEFS directories before it bootstraps Python. This allows the normal virtual
  environment mechanism to work. Pyodide virtual environments contain a patched
  copy of pip and a custom ``pip.conf`` so that pip will install Pyodide wheels.

>   On startup the Pyodide ``python`` cli will preload all Emscripten dynamic

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  On startup the Pyodide ``python`` CLI will preload all Emscripten dynamic
```

  libraries that are in the sitee-packages directory.

Console and Interactive Usage
-----------------------------

``stdin`` defaults to always returning ``EOF``, while ``stdout`` and ``stderr``
default to calling ``console.log`` and ``console.error`` respectively. It is

> possible to pass handlers to ``bootstrapEmscriptenExecutable()`` to configure

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
possible to pass handlers to :js:func:`bootstrapEmscriptenExecutable()` to configure
```

currently has no support for stack switching ``stdin``.

Currently, the Emscripten Python node runner uses the default I/O that
Emscripten provides. The web example uses ``Atomics`` for ``stdin`` and has
custom ``stdout`` and ``stderr`` handlers, but they exhibit the undesirable line
buffering behavior. We will upstream the standard streams behaviors from
Pyodide.

In the long term, we hope to implement stack switching ``stdin`` devices, but
that is out of scope for this PEP.

-----------------
Dynamic Libraries
-----------------

Main Thread Synchronous Loading Limit
=====================================

In the main browser thread, a dynamic library can only be loaded synchronously
if it is at most 4 kilobytes. This excludes most nontrivial dynamic libraries.
This limit is not present in Node and can be avoided by using a web worker. If
stack switching is available, then it is possible to make ``dlopen()`` stack
switch in order to instantiate a dynamic library synchronously.

To avoid the synchronous loading limit, Pyodide currently preloads all dynamic
libraries present in a wheel when installing the wheel (or on startup). This is

> a significant disadvantage with pages like scipy that include a very large

Reviewer 5: "libraries" like scipy, not pages?

Author: maybe `packages` is the most appropriate word here.

We consider the C runtime state to be corrupted if there is a WebAssembly trap,
an unhandled JavaScript exception, or an uncaught WebAssembly throw instruction.

Unlike in other platforms, there is no operating system to shut down the
executable when there is a trap or other unrecoverable corruption of the libc
runtime. We need to provide our own code to print tracebacks, dump the memory,
or do whatever else is helpful for debugging a crash. If we expose a JavaScript
API, we also must ensure that it is disabled after an unrecoverable crash to
prevent downstream users from observing the Python runtime in an inconsistent
state.

In order to detect fatal errors, Pyodide uses the following approach: all
fallable calls from WebAssembly into JavaScript are wrapped with a JavaScript
try/catch block. Any caught JavaScript exceptions are translated into Python
exceptions. This ensures that any recoverable JavaScript error is caught before
it unwinds through any WebAssembly frames. All entrypoints to WebAssembly are
also wrapped with JavaScript try/catch blocks. Any exceptions caught there have
unwound WebAssembly frames and are thus considered to be fatal errors (though

> there is a special case to handle ``exit()``). This requires foundational

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
there is a special case to handle :func:`~sys.exit()`). This requires foundational
```

Author: I was really thinking of the libc exit function here. But certainly the most likely the reason it would be called is because someone called `sys.exit()`.

integration with the Python/JavaScript foreign function interface.

When the Pyodide runtime catches a fatal exception, it introspects the error to
determine whether it came from a trap, a logic error in a system call, a
``setjmp()`` without a ``longjmp()``, or a libcxxabi call to ``__cxa_throw()``
(an uncaught C++ exception or Rust panic). We render as informative an error
message as we can. We also call ``_Py_DumpTraceback()`` so we can display a
Python traceback in addition to the JS/WebAssembly traceback. It also disables
the JavaScript API so that further attempts to call into Python result in an
error saying that the runtime has fatally failed.

Normally, WebAssembly symbols are stripped so the WebAssembly frames are not
very useful. Compiling and linking with ``-g2`` (or a higher debug setting)
ensures that WebAssembly symbols are included and they will appear in the
traceback.

Because Emscripten Python currently has no JavaScript API and no foreign function
interface, the situation is much simpler. The Python Node.js runner wraps the call

> to ``bootstrapEmscriptenExecutable()`` in a try/catch block. If an exception is

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
to :js:func:`bootstrapEmscriptenExecutable()` in a try/catch block. If an exception is
```

Removed Modules
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The following modules are removed from the standard library to reduce download
size and since they currently wouldn't work in the WebAssembly VM.

- curses
- dbm
- ensurepip
- fcntl
- grp
- idlelib
- msvcrt
- pwd
- resource
- syslog
- termios
- tkinter
- turtle
- turtledemo
- venv
- winreg
- winsound

Included but not Working Modules
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The following modules can be imported, but are not functional:

- multiprocessing
- threading
- sockets

as well as any functionality that requires these.

The following are present but cannot be imported due to a dependency on the
termios package which has been removed:

- pty
- tty

Platform Identification
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``sys.platform`` will return ``"emscripten"``. Although Emscripten attempts to
be compatible with Linux, the differences are significant enough that a distinct
name is justified. This is consistent with the return value from ``os.uname()``.

There is also ``sys._emscripten_info`` which includes the Emscripten version and
the runtime (either ``navigator.userAgent`` in a browser or ``"Node js" +

> process.version`` in Node.js).

Reviewer 6: The discussion around PEP 730 and PEP 738 concluded that `platform` was a better place for a public API for this sort of data (recognising that there may be a need to have it embedded in `sys` as a compiled property). There's probably space for an `emscripten_ver()` analog to `mac_ver()`, `ios_ver()` and `android_ver()`.

---------

Existing Package Support
========================

Pyodide currently maintains ports of 255 different packages at the time of this
writing, including major scientific Python packages like numpy, scipy, pandas,
polars, scikit-learn, opencv, pyarrow, and Pillow as well as general purpose
packages like aiohttp, requests, pydantic, cryptography, and orjson.

About 60 packages are also testing against Pyodide in their CI, including numpy,
pandas, awkward-cpp, scikit-image, statsmodels, pyarrow, hypothesis, and PyO3.

Emscripten Wheel Format
=======================

Emscripten wheels will use either the format ``emscripten_<version>_wasm32`` or
``pyodide_<abi>_wasm32``. For example:

* ``emscripten_3_1_58_wasm32``
* ``pyodide_2025_0_wasm32``

The first triple is ambiguous, since even with Emscripten 3.1.58 it is possible
to link dynamic libraries that require a large number of distinct ABIs,
depending on linker and compiler options. It is our intent that the
``pyodide_2025_0`` specifies the particular ABI. Thus, the relationship between
``pyodide_<abi>`` and ``emscripten_<version>`` is intended to be the same as the
relationship between ``manylinux<version>`` and ``linux``.

> The specification of the ``pyodide_<abi>`` ABI includes:

Reviewer 5: It would be good if there was a link to some page where these ABI versions are going to be tracked maybe?

Author: I've been meaning to add to Pyodide a `policies` page, which would be a good place to refer to for this. I think the most contentious part of this PEP is likely to be who/what organization chooses the ABI and what it is called...

Reviewer 6: I've commented on this on the discussion thread; but tl;dr, I've got concerns about using `pyodide_<abi>` as the naming here, even if in practice we end up using Pyodide's specification.

* Which version of the Emscripten compiler is used
* What libraries are statically linked with the interpreter
* What stack unwinding ABI is to be used
* Which runtime platform features are required to be present

and a handful of other similar details that affect the ABI.

The ABI is selected by choosing the appropriate version of the Emscripten
compiler and passing appropriate compiler and linker flags. It is possible for
other people to build their own Python interpreter that is compatible with the
Pyodide ABI, it is not necessary to use the Pyodide distribution itself.

The ``pyodide build`` tool knows how to create wheels that match our ABI. As an
alternative,
`the auditwheel-emscripten tool <https://github.com/ryanking13/auditwheel-emscripten>`__

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

is capable of performing basic compatibility checks, vendoring shared libraries,
and retagging the wheel from ``emscripten_<version>`` to ``pyodide_<abi>``. Unlike
with manylinux, there is no need for a docker container to build the
``pyodide_<abi>`` wheels. All that is needed is a Linux machine and appropriate
versions of Python, node, and Emscripten.

------
PEP 11
------

PEP 11 will be updated to indicate that Emscripten is supported. Specifically
the triples ``wasm32-unknown-emscripten_xx_xx_xx``.

Russell Keith-Magee will serve as the initial core team contact for these ABIs.

===========
Future Work
===========

-------------------------------------------------
Improving Cross Builds in the Packaging Ecosystem
-------------------------------------------------

Python now supports four non-self-hosting platforms: iOS, Android, wasi, and
Emscripten. All of them will need to build packages via cross builds. Currently,
``pyodide-build`` allows building a very large number of Python packages for
Emscripten, but it relies on a giant pile of hacks. In the long run, we would

> like to make the packaging ecosystem support cross builds in a sane way.

Reviewer 5: Maybe a bit more formal language and more positively worded for last two sentences would be better. :) Like I'm sure in any large projects there are parts that people wish could be rewritten from scratch, but it doesn't really stop them from being used and doing what they were supposed to.

> the triples ``wasm32-unknown-emscripten_xx_xx_xx``.

Reviewer 6: To confirm - are the wildcards going to be part of the PEP 11 spec, or will be updating PEP11 each time a new specific emscripten version is added to the test pool?

Author: I was hoping to keep the wild cards. Maybe I should give a concrete example here or otherwise clarify that they are standing in for a version number. Also, we don't support _all_ emscripten versions, so we should probably add where we plan to indicate this.

Emscripten. All of them will need to build packages via cross builds. Currently,
``pyodide-build`` allows building a very large number of Python packages for
Emscripten, but it is very complicated. Ideally, the Python packaging ecosystem
would have standards for cross builds. This is a difficult long term project,
particularly because the packaging system is complex and was designed from the

> ground up with the assumption that cross compilation would not happen.

Reviewer 6: It's not a blocker on this PEP, but for public visibility - I'm hoping to kick start a discussion about this very shortly.

This is a collection of Pyodide runtime features that are out of scope for this
PEP and for the Python 3.14 development cycle but we would like to upstream in
the future.

JavaScript API for Bootstrapping
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Currently we offer no stable API for bootstrapping Python. Instead, we use `one
collection of settings for the Node.js CLI entrypoint
<https://github.com/python/cpython/blob/98fa4a49fecbac3c990a25ce5d300592dad31be0/Tools/wasm/emscripten/node_entry.mjs#L33-L46>`__
and `a separate collection of settings for the browser demo
<https://github.com/python/cpython/blob/98fa4a49fecbac3c990a25ce5d300592dad31be0/Tools/wasm/emscripten/web_example/python.worker.mjs#L64-L88>`__.

The Emscripten executable startup API is complicated and there are many possible
configurations that are broken. Pyodide offers a simpler set of options than
Emscripten. This gives downstream users a lot of flexibility while allowing us
to maintain a small number of tested configurations. It also reduces downstream
code duplication.

Eventually, we would like to upstream Pyodide's bootstrapping API. In the short
term, to keep things simple we will support no JavaScript API.

> FFI
> ~~~

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
JavaScript foreign function interface (FFI)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```

Because Emscripten supports POSIX, a significant number of tasks can be achieved
using the ``os`` module. However, many fundamental operations in JavaScript
runtimes are not possible via POSIX APIs. Pyodide's approach is to specify a
mapping between the JavaScript object model and the Python object model and a

> calling convention that allows high level bidirectional integration.

Reviewer 3: Is there a reference for this?
